Create a bootstrap governance document (#8)
open-feature/community: README.md

# OpenFeature project governance

[![Roadmap](https://img.shields.io/static/v1?label=Roadmap&message=public&color=green)](https://github.com/orgs/openfeatureflags/projects/1)
[![Contributing](https://img.shields.io/static/v1?label=Contributing&message=guide&color=blue)](https://github.com/openfeatureflags/.github/blob/main/CONTRIBUTING.md)

This document describes the bootstrap governance process under which the project will operate
until the final governance process is identified.

> :warning: This is a temporary (aka bootstrap) governance document that

> > is effective until the project is fully established.

Author: ```suggestion
> is effective until the project is fully established.
> See [this issue](https://github.com/openfeatureflags/governance/issues/11) for the scope of the full governance document.
```

## Project manifesto

### Goal

> Our goal is to create an open standard for feature flag management to support a robust feature flag ecosystem using cloud native technologies.

Author: ```suggestion
Our goal is to create an open standard for feature flag management to support a robust feature flag ecosystem using cloud native technologies.
```

### Scope

The scope includes but not limited to:

- An **open standard** that allows adopters and vendors to easily integrate with a spec-compliant feature flag solutions
- Creating a **vendor-agnostic ecosystem** supported by the CNCF that provide a seamless experience for developers, SREs, and vendors
- Unified API and SDK
- Developer-first, cloud-native reference implementation

> - Extensibility for open source and commercial offerings

Author: ```suggestion
- Extensibility for open source and commercial offerings
- Adoption by the open source and proprietary projects listed on the [Cloud Native Landscape](https://landscape.cncf.io/)
```

### Why OpenFeature?

There are many existing solutions, open source or not.
Unfortunately, they lack key features needed for wide adoption
by companies and in the open source ecosystem:

- **Many SDKs** doing the same thing, but slightly differently
- Many companies **"rebuilding the wheel"**
- SDKs are generally open source but have no ecosystem
- **Vendor lock-in** at code-level
- **No collaboration** across vendors 
- **Missing integration** with observability tools (e.g. OpenTelemetry)

> 

Author: ```suggestion

## CNCF membership

Our goal is to join the [Cloud Native Computing Foundation (CNCF)](https://www.cncf.io/) as a sandbox project shortly after the inception of OpenFeature.
Should it be accepted, the project will establish governance along with the CNCF best practices, 
and then target reaching the incubating and than the graduated statuses in the foundation.

```

Reviewer: Seems fine but as I said above I would suggest to define the governance model as early as possible in order to grow a healthy community. It will be easier to convince people to join the project in early days if they see a clear path for them to become an important part of the project (maintainer, governance, technical committee, etc).

# OpenFeature project governance

[![Roadmap](https://img.shields.io/static/v1?label=Roadmap&message=public&color=green)](https://github.com/orgs/openfeatureflags/projects/1)
[![Contributing](https://img.shields.io/static/v1?label=Contributing&message=guide&color=blue)](https://github.com/openfeatureflags/.github/blob/main/CONTRIBUTING.md)

This document describes the bootstrap governance process under which the project will operate
until the final governance process is identified.

> :warning: This is a temporary (aka bootstrap) governance document that
> is effective until the project is fully established.

> > A final process 

Author: Nope, leftover

```suggestion
```

## Project manifesto

> ### Our goal

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
### Goal
```

Our goal is to create an open standard for feature flag management to support a robust feature flag ecosystem using cloud native technologies.

### Scope

The scope includes but not limited to:

- An **open standard** that allows adopters and vendors to easily integrate with spec-compliant feature flag solutions

> - Creating a **vendor-agnostic ecosystem** supported by the CNCF that provide a seamless experience for developers, SREs, and vendors

Author: I thin so, but I will update the wording to make it explicit it is intended state

> - Creating a **vendor-agnostic ecosystem** supported by the CNCF that provide a seamless experience for developers, SREs, and vendors

Author: ```suggestion
- A **vendor-agnostic ecosystem** for users, application developers, SREs, and vendors
```

- Providing Unified API and SDK;
- Developer-first, cloud-native reference implementation; 
- Ensuring extensibility for open source and commercial offerings.

### Why OpenFeature?

There are many existing solutions, open source or not.
Unfortunately they lack key features needed for wide adoption
by companies and in the open source ecosystem:

- **Many SDKs** doing the same thing, but slightly differently

> - Many companies **“rebuilding” the wheel**

Reviewer: I would quote the whole phrase "rebuilding the wheel"

```suggestion
- Many companies **“rebuilding the wheel”**
```

I would also consider not using smart-quotes to ensure compatibility with the most people

```suggestion
- Many companies **"rebuilding the wheel"**
```

- SDKs are generally open source but have no ecosystem

> - **“Vendor” lock-in** at code-level

Reviewer: No need to quote vendor here

```suggestion
- **Vendor lock-in** at code-level
```

> - **No collaboration** across vendors. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **No collaboration** across vendors 
```

- **Missing integration** with observability tools (e.g. OpenTelemetry)

> ### Project Differentiators

Reviewer 2: This section deals more with the proposed reference implementation. Perhaps we should omit it for now.

Author: I can move it to the specification indeed

> This project is more than just copy and paste of existing solutions

Reviewer: These bullet points are all negatives of existing solutions. I would propose to rephrase them to make them positives of your proposed solution. For example instead of saying existing solutions have eval logic in SDKs, you could say that openfeature will evaluate all rules on a centralized service. Or instead of saying existing solutions do not have a unified grammar, you could say that you are proposing a unified grammar specification that may be understood by any spec-compliant tooling.

Author: This comes from the slidedeck by @beeme1mr. I do not have strong opinion here, because manifesto documents are usually quite opinionated. Happy to rephrase though

> ### Why OpenFeature?
> 
> There are many existing solutions, open source or not.
> Unfortunately, they lack key features needed for wide adoption
> by companies and in the open source ecosystem:
> 
> - **Many SDKs** doing the same thing, but slightly differently
> - Many companies **"rebuilding the wheel"**
> - SDKs are generally open source but have no ecosystem
> - **Vendor lock-in** at code-level
> - **No collaboration** across vendors 
> - **Missing integration** with observability tools (e.g. OpenTelemetry)

Author: ```suggestion
### Why OpenFeature?

There are many existing solutions, open source or not.
In the industry there are multiple common issues limiting wide adoption:

- **Many SDKs** doing the same thing, but slightly differently
- SDKs are generally open source but have no ecosystem
- **Different APIs** in implementations, hence it is difficult to migrate between them
- **Limited interoperability** across implentations 
- **Missing integration** with observability tools (e.g. OpenTelemetry)
```

* Current solutions often have **eval logic in SDKs**.
  This may require **updating all your apps** for a new rule type.

> * Config in Feature Flagging tools that are **separate from the rest of the app** make it harder to use approaches like GitOps. 

Reviewer: I had to read this line several times to understand what you meant. I would consider rewording it to make it more clear. It is also not clear how this is proposed to be solved

* Config and rule changes are **hard to integrate into observability** tools 

> * Information to decide on features already available in observability tools is **not leveraged and collected twice**

Reviewer: I can't figure out what this bullet is trying to say

* No **agreed on grammar/structure** for rules which could be automatically validated (e.g. with CUE)

## Roadmap

> The project roadmap is available [here](https://github.com/orgs/openfeatureflags/projects/1).

Reviewer: dead or non-public link

> * Current solutions often have **eval logic in SDKs**.
>   This may require **updating all your apps** for a new rule type.
> * Config in Feature Flagging tools that are **separate from the rest of the app** make it harder to use approaches like GitOps. 
> * Config and rule changes are **hard to integrate into observability** tools 
> * Information to decide on features already available in observability tools is **not leveraged and collected twice**
> * No **agreed on grammar/structure** for rules which could be automatically validated (e.g. with CUE)

Author: ```suggestion
* Current solutions often have **eval logic in SDKs**.
  This may require **updating all your apps** for a new rule type.
* Config in Feature Flagging tools that are **separate from the rest of the app** make it harder to use approaches like GitOps. 
* Config and rule changes are **hard to integrate into observability** tools 
* Information to decide on features already available in observability tools is **not leveraged and collected twice**
* No standardized format for defining feature flagging rules
```

New initiatives for the roadmap can be suggested via marking an issue as `roadmap-proposal` and then reaching a community decision as documented in _Decision Making_.

> - [Initiatives on the project roadmap](https://github.com/search?q=org%3Aopenfeatureflags+label%3Aroadmap&type=issues)

Reviewer: Roadmap appears to be both a github project (linked above) and a label. It will take additional work to keep these in sync and if they are ever out of sync it will be very confusing. I would consider deciding on one or the other (personally I think a project is the better solution here)

> - [Pending roadmap suggestions](https://github.com/search?q=org%3Aopenfeatureflags+label%3Aroadmap-proposal&type=issues)

Reviewer: I guess it depends what you mean by roadmap. If you mean it to refer to overall project direction, then I would argue that only certain people in technical leadership should have permission to update it anyway. If you mean it more like a backlog that is just any task planned for the future then a label would be fine. In any case, you can do what you feel is best here its just my opinion.

> ## Decision making

Reviewer: I would suggest that the pull request on the specification itself constitutes a decision and define the rules for when a pull request can be merged. The wording in this section does not make it clear if a decision made in slack should be automatically approved when it is a pull request.

Author: FTR https://github.com/openfeatureflags/governance/issues/11

> Decisions are made by a consensus of [Interested Parties](./interested-parties.md).

Reviewer: It is not clear how to become an interested party or what the responsibilities and privileges are of an interested party. Currently the interested parties are all listed as companies, not individual contributors. Does this mean each of these companies will always have the same power regardless of if their contributors move away from the project? This model also strongly discourages open source contributors who are not affiliated with a company or with a company that wants to make a public declaration of support for the project. Most CNCF projects I'm aware of don't have such a corporate-first model of governing. I would suggest you define roles such as technical committee, governance committee, and maintainer, and make it very clear what the requirements are to move to the next rung of the ladder and what the expectations/permissions/responsibilities are for each. I would also caution against having "founder" be a position at all because you would hope the project lasts longer than any person's involvement or employment at a particular company.

Author: > It is not clear how to become an interested party or what the responsibilities and privileges are of an interested party. 

The was a sentence about submitting a pull request. Created https://github.com/openfeatureflags/governance/pull/10 to make things more explicit

> Currently the interested parties are all listed as companies, not individual contributors. This model also strongly discourages open source contributors....

I do not think so, the first field was for an individual. Anyway https://github.com/openfeatureflags/governance/pull/10 makes it much more explicit

> Most CNCF projects I'm aware of don't have such a corporate-first model of governing

Well... things in CNCF projects are quite complicated

> I would suggest you define roles such as technical committee, governance committee, and maintainer, and make it very clear what the requirements are to move to the next rung of the ladder and what the expectations/permissions/responsibilities are for each.

This is in the scope for the full governance model. This document is only the **bootstrap** governance document. Created https://github.com/openfeatureflags/governance/issues/11 to be explicit about the expectations for the governance document

> I would also caution against having "founder" be a position at all

There might be a Founder position with some additional privileges in the final governance. I would not support a founder as ultimate decision making body (BDFL alike governance models), and I haver a story of fighting against it in Jenkins.

For the bootstrap governance, having an ultimate decision making body is common and somewhat reasonable to speed up the things. I am waiting feedback/decision by @beeme1mr on this matter

If this consensus cannot be reached,
the decision can be made by the plain majority of founding members.

<!-- TODO: List founding members or delegate the decision to CDF TAG App Delivery or another entity -->

> Key discussions and decisions should happen asynchronously in communication channels like GitHub Issues, pull requests and project chats.

Reviewer: I would discourage key discussions from happening in project chat where they are not easily searchable or archived.

Author: Me too. At the same time unfortunately it happens in almost all projects. I am fine with it happening in the bootstrap phase when not all channels are established. I will remove explicit reference in the text anyway

```suggestion
Key discussions and decisions should happen asynchronously in communication channels like GitHub Issues, discussions or pull requests.
```

# OpenFeature project governance

> [![Roadmap](https://img.shields.io/static/v1?label=Roadmap&message=public&color=green)](https://github.com/orgs/openfeatureflags/projects/1)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
[![Roadmap](https://img.shields.io/static/v1?label=Roadmap&message=public&color=green)](https://github.com/orgs/open-feature/projects/1)
```

> [![Contributing](https://img.shields.io/static/v1?label=Contributing&message=guide&color=blue)](https://github.com/openfeatureflags/.github/blob/main/CONTRIBUTING.md)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
[![Contributing](https://img.shields.io/static/v1?label=Contributing&message=guide&color=blue)](https://github.com/open-feature/.github/blob/main/CONTRIBUTING.md)
```

This document describes the bootstrap governance process under which the project will operate
until the final governance process is identified.

> :warning: This is a temporary (aka bootstrap) governance document that
> is effective until the project is fully established.

> > See [this issue](https://github.com/openfeatureflags/governance/issues/11) for the scope of the full governance document.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
> See [this issue](https://github.com/open-feature/governance/issues/11) for the scope of the full governance document.
```

## Project manifesto

### Goal

Our goal is to create an open standard for feature flag management to support a robust feature flag ecosystem using cloud native technologies.

### Scope

The scope includes but not limited to:

- An **open standard** that allows adopters and vendors to easily integrate with a spec-compliant feature flag solutions
- A **vendor-agnostic ecosystem** for users, application developers, SREs, and vendors
- Unified API and SDK
- Developer-first, cloud-native reference implementation
- Extensibility for open source and commercial offerings
- Adoption by the open source and proprietary projects listed on the [Cloud Native Landscape](https://landscape.cncf.io/)

### Why OpenFeature?

There are many existing solutions, open source or not.
In the industry there are multiple common issues limiting wide adoption:

- **Many SDKs** doing the same thing, but slightly differently
- SDKs are generally open source but have no ecosystem
- **Different APIs** in implementations, hence it is difficult to migrate between them

> - **Limited interoperability** across implentations 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- **Limited interoperability** across implementations
```
